Title: About
Date: 2018-03-10 19:06
Category: Meta

I'm your host, Louis Jackman. Welcome to my site.

I live in the UK and specialise in information security and software
development. I can do system administration, but that interest only goes so far
as to support other areas I'm interested in. This website's articles are mostly
around these topics, albeit with many diversions.

My CV can be found as [here](/theme/cv/cv.html). Contact information like my
[LinkedIn profile](https://uk.linkedin.com/in/louis-jackman) can be found on the
[contact page](/pages/contact.html).

***

I've worked with Linux, AWS, Python, Ansible, system hardening, ISMSes,
REST/HTTP, Terraform, Docker, and Java and its Spring ecosystem.  I've also
dabbled in Kubernetes, TypeScript, Selenium, WordPress, Ruby, Heroku, various
versions of Angular, React, redux, redux-observable, RxJS, and macOS. Dabbling
isn't the same as being adept, of course.

JavaScript and Rust feature heavily in my personal projects, with C and Python
also showing up from time to time. I've used Rust since 0.15, but it has
thankfully stabilised a lot since then.

***

Aside from my primary skills, my technological interests also include
programming language theory, concurrency and parallelism,
[langsec](http://langsec.org/), programming formalism like static typing and
proof systems, and compile-time metaprogramming. I might even have ended up a
static-typing zealot were it not for my exposure to
[Lisp](http://lisp-lang.org/) and [Erlang](https://www.erlang.org/).

I'm at home in Unix-like command line environments, web browsers, and
mobile-style apps, but feel out of my element using WIMP GUIs on the desktop,
non-Unix-like operating systems, and bulky IDEs. There's nothing _wrong_ with
them, they just don't match my style of working.

I like Vim's modal paradigm of text editing but find the defacto
implementations, Vim 8 and NeoVim, to be lacking. The Lisp Machine model of
development that inspired Emacs has a lot of potential, but Emacs as an
implementation has serious problems, not least of which is a terrible set of
RSI-inducing keybindings that were an evolutionary dead end by the late '90s.

***

My spare time is sometimes occupied with writing articles for this site and
working on projects like my programming language
[Sylan](https://sylan.technology/), but most of it is non-technological
endevours.

I purport to watch films, read books, and listen to music. If something is
spoken about fondly a decade after its release, it might even be worth reading
or listening to. Consuming latest releases costs more and makes _you_ the
filtering process rather than someone else, so why bother?  I'm less picky about
films in the cinema because that's as much for the social experience as the
film. I don't usually bother with TV because it takes too much effort hacking
through the deadweight to get to the worthwhile content. Despite videogames
being a fixture of my youth, they were the first to fall by the wayside when
time became more constrained in later years.

***

This site uses [Pelican](https://getpelican.com), which is implemented in
[Python](https://www.python.org) and uses [Jinja](http://jinja.pocoo.org) for
templating.
